ShEF: Shielded Enclaves for Cloud FPGAs
Mark Zhao
myzhao@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
Mingyu Gao
gaomy@tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
Christos Kozyrakis
christos@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University
Stanford, California, USA
ABSTRACT
FPGAs are now used in public clouds to accelerate a wide range of
applications, including many that operate on sensitive data such as
financial and medical records. We present ShEF, a trusted execution environment (TEE) for cloud-based reconfigurable accelerators.
ShEF is independent from CPU-based TEEs and allows secure execution under a threat model where the adversary can control all
software running on the CPU connected to the FPGA, has physical
access to the FPGA, and can compromise the FPGA interface logic
of the cloud provider. ShEF provides a secure boot and remote attestation process that relies solely on existing FPGA mechanisms for root
of trust. It also includes a Shield component that provides secure
access to data while the accelerator is in use. The Shield is highly
customizable and extensible, allowing users to craft a bespoke security solution that fits their accelerator’s memory access patterns,
bandwidth, and security requirements at minimum performance
and area overheads. We describe a prototype implementation of
ShEF for existing cloud FPGAs, map ShEF to a performant and
secure storage application, and measure the performance benefits
of customizable security using five additional accelerators.
CCS CONCEPTS
· Computer systems organization → Reconfigurable computing; Cloud computing; · Security and privacy → Hardware
security implementation.
KEYWORDS
trusted execution, enclaves, cloud computing, FPGAs, reconfigurable computing
ACM Reference Format:
Mark Zhao, Mingyu Gao, and Christos Kozyrakis. 2022. ShEF: Shielded
Enclaves for Cloud FPGAs. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS ’22), February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3503222.3507733
1 INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is a double-edged sword. Cloud servers provide
unmatched capabilities that are highly available, easily deployable,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’22, February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9205-1/22/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3503222.3507733
and widely scalable. This flexibility is critical for data-driven applications such as machine learning. However, the massive volume
of data flowing through shared infrastructure presents new security and privacy concerns due to the corresponding growth in the
trusted computing base (TCB) of cloud applications. When users
process sensitive data on the cloud, they implicitly trust a multitude
of entities including the developers and operators of the underlying
hardware, OSes/VMMs, storage and database systems, and identity
and access management services. They also trust the employees of
the cloud service provider (CSP) who have physical access to the
infrastructure. Recent data leaks demonstrate that a vulnerability
in any layer of the stack can result in exposure of highly-sensitive
information, e.g., the health and financial records for hundreds of
millions of people [5, 9, 66].
These issues have led to the development of software security mechanisms to protect sensitive data in the cloud. Users can
use purely cryptographic solutions such as homomorphic encryption (HE) [46] or integrate ad-hoc cryptographic schemes from a
plethora of libraries. Unfortunately, HE is prohibitively expensive
for most real-world applications [27]. Traditional cryptographic
libraries, assuming correctness, still depend on a large TCB, including the CSP’s multiple layers of software controlled by potentially
malicious employees.
CPU-based trusted execution environments (TEEs), such as Intel
SGX [33] and ARM TrustZone [17] shrink the TCB. TEEs provide
hardware-based isolation for user code and data even given malicious privileged software and physical attacks. However, hardware
is inherently hardened, presenting many security problems. First,
cryptography and cryptanalysis are constantly evolving; standards
and best-practices constantly improve, especially as new computing paradigms such as quantum computing are introduced [26].
Second, applications use numerous compute and communication
patterns, each demanding different levels of protection. For example, some applications may only require authenticated encryption
for streaming data, while others read and write multiple times to
a given address and thus need additional security such as Merkle
Trees [85]. Finally, the recent vulnerabilities that directly compromise SGX highlight the difficulty of implementing bug-free security
mechanisms in modern CPUs [28, 30, 58, 61, 65, 71, 80, 83, 91ś93].
For these reasons, it is desirable to have the flexibility to enhance
security mechanisms post-manufacturing, a trait that hardened
CPU security mechanisms do not provide.
Moreover, CPU-based TEEs do not directly enable isolated execution on accelerators such as GPUs [31], FPGAs [45, 95], or TPUs [55].
Slowing trends in process scaling are driving specialized hardware
in order to achieve scalable performance [50]. As a result, CSPs
including Amazon [2], Microsoft [8], Huawei [11], and Baidu [13],
are rapidly deploying remote FPGAs to meet increased computing
demands, allowing users to deploy custom accelerators generated
from application code [32, 48, 59, 69, 81].
Supporting secure computing on remote FPGAs is thus essential
for many emerging applications, such as medical, financial, machine
learning (ML), and regulatory use-cases, that require both security
and acceleration. For example, FPGAs are at the forefront for accelerating genomics sequencing [89, 98]. FPGAs are also extensively
used for accelerating Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [82], which
have demonstrated significant impact in medical diagnosis [40].
Recent work even directly call for accelerator TEEs, including FPGAs, as an essential component of distributed federated learning in
the cloud [101] and GDPR-compliant storage systems [53]. These
sensitive accelerators are seeing widespread adoption in industry, with Xilinx marketing FPGAs directly for ML-based diagnostics [21] and myriad companies offering AWS F1 accelerators for genomics [7, 14, 15], financial analysis [10], and network security [12]
applications on the AWS Marketplace.
Unfortunately, recently-proposed TEEs for accelerators, including FPGAs, are either insecure against direct physical attacks [54,
105], require fundamental hardware changes [54, 94, 105], only address isolated challenges such as attestation [36, 52, 72, 99], or rely
on external CPU TEEs [52, 54, 94]. Moreover, they ignore the Shell
logic [3, 57, 60, 88], a fundamental untrusted operating system for
cloud FPGA logic.
We address these challenges with the Shielded Enclaves for Cloud
FPGAs (ShEF) framework that brings together hardware-based bespoke security and customizable acceleration for FPGAs. ShEF applies
the confidentiality, integrity, freshness, and isolation guarantees
provided by TEEs [78] to custom FPGA accelerators, even in the
presence of malicious software and hardware logic, or physical
attacks. ShEF targets current cloud FPGA deployments and commodity FPGA hardware. While ShEF relies on CPUs for networking
and data transfer, it is decoupled from and assumes no trust in CPU
TEEs or other software running on CPUs. Hence, ShEF minimizes
the TCB and avoids the aforementioned issues with hardened hardware. ShEF provides customization as a key feature, enabling users
to adapt security mechanisms to match their accelerator’s unique
bandwidth requirements, memory access characteristics, and threat
models. By provisioning only the right levels of protection, ShEF
allows users to address their threat model at minimum performance
and area cost.
ShEF consists of two main components. The ShEF boot process
centers around a software security kernel that builds a chain of
trust on top of currently-existing FPGA security mechanisms. Its
primary purpose is to (a) load the accelerator into a known and
trusted state on the FPGA, (b) attest the state to a remote verifier
chosen by the user, and (c) ensure that sensitive ports such as JTAG
are secured during runtime.
Once the accelerator design is securely booted onto the FPGA,
the ShEF Shield communicates with host software and protects the
accelerator’s sensitive data through a highly customizable and extensible set of soft-logic engines. Users can customize a rich set of
parameters, such as encryption logic parallelism, optimizations for
memory access patterns, cryptographic primitives, authentication
block size, and key size over individual regions of memory. For
example, a DNN accelerator that reads in large blocks of weights
can choose to use large encryption blocks to amortize integrity
check overheads and forgo expensive replay-attack countermeasures specifically for those weights. Other accelerators that perform multiple small reads and writes (e.g., for graph processing)
may conversely select smaller block sizes to prevent unnecessary
data transfers and use heavyweight memory authentication techniques [37].
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We identify requirements on enabling TEEs on cloud FPGAs
and gaps not addressed by prior work due to current cloud
FPGA devices and environments.
• We implement an end-to-end workflow on current FPGA
devices that provides the first comprehensive and customizable TEE for cloud FPGAs.
• We present protocols that enable important TEE building
blocks, including secure boot and remote attestation, on top
of our workflow.
• We identify customizability as a key requirement for cloud
FPGAs and provide a solution via the modular Shield to easily
customize ShEF to the diverse security and performance
requirements of FPGA-based accelerators.
We implemented the end-to-end ShEF workflow on a representative FPGA, and we configured the Shield’s parallelism and security
for six accelerators with diverse performance requirements and
access patterns, including a GDPR secure storage benchmark [53]
and DNNWeaver [81]. We demonstrated that ShEF minimized overheads to 0-122% with 3.1-11% area on AWS F1 instances. ShEF is
open-source1, allowing the community to review and build on its
design.
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
ShEF is motivated by the confluence of two important trends [49].
First, hardware security is becoming a first-class citizen, driven by
the ongoing microarchitectural side-channel attacks to CPUs [28,
58, 61, 65, 80] and SGX in particular [30, 71, 83, 91ś93]. Second,
the end of Dennard scaling is galvanizing a shift towards energyefficient domain-specific accelerators (DSAs). It is unclear how to
bridge the gap and provide secure computation for DSAs which
have disparate security and performance requirements.
ShEF realizes recent requests for FPGA TEEs in order to provide
secure remote storage [53]. However, ShEF goes further and makes
the key insight to leverage the flexibility of cloud FPGAs to enable
secure remote acceleration. Numerous applications such as machine
learning [48], genomics [98], multi-party computation [97], and
simulation [56] already utilize DSAs on cloud FPGAs. The goal
of ShEF is to provide security guarantees with the same level of
flexibility and to create bespoke TEEs for cloud FPGAs that fit
accelerators’ specific needs. TEEs, FPGA security, and cloud FPGAs
are all well-studied domains. Merging these domains, however,
introduces the new challenges discussed in this section.
2.1 Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs)
TEEs secure remote computation by providing an isolated environment for users’ sensitive code on devices controlled by untrusted
parties and running untrusted, privileged software.
1https://github.com/stanford-mast/ShEF
While there exist numerous flavors of TEEs [17, 29, 33, 34, 41, 42,
64, 67, 74, 85ś87], there are necessary and sufficient building blocks
that they all provide [78]. TEEs are built on a chain of trust, starting
with a hardware-based root of trust in the form of a private key
stored securely on chip [78, 103]. A secure boot process extends
trust by cryptographically measuring each component during boot,
up to and including the secured application. This integrity measurement is then cryptographically proven to a remote user of the
secured application in a remote attestation process. Once trust
is established, confidential data is emplaced into the TEE from a
secure storage and I/O channel. The secure application processes
the data, and the TEE ensures that any interaction with the rest of
the system is secured via an isolated execution mechanism.
In the context of spatial computing platforms, such as FPGAs, we
assert that a TEE must also be customizable. Accelerators use a
selection of I/O interfaces, exhibit a broad range of memory access
and throughput characteristics, and require different levels of security mechanisms. A static TEE that provides a general solution for
all accelerators is doomed to either be over-instrumented and waste
resources or not satisfy each accelerator’s stringent throughput and
security requirements.
2.2 Conventional FPGA Security Mechanisms
Xilinx [20] and Intel [16] FPGAs target mission-critical applications
such as defense and networking, and thus adopt a similar threat
model and security mechanisms [24, 76]. Namely, a single bitstream
developer must have physical and secure access to the FPGA before
deploying the device into an untrusted environment. The security mechanisms’ goal is to ensure that (a) only developer-signed
bitstreams can be loaded, (b) bitstreams are encrypted to prevent
reverse-engineering, and (c) the FPGA can detect and respond to
physical tampering. These mechanisms are enabled in Intel and Xilinx FPGAs via a series of redundant, embedded processor modules
executing from BootROM and programmable firmware [24, 76]. We
refer to these as the Security Processor Block (SPB) hereinafter.
The SPB has access to two pieces of information embedded in
secure, on-chip, non-volatile storage: an AES key and the hash
of a public ECDSA (Intel) or RSA (Xilinx) key. The AES key can
be further encrypted via a physically-unclonable function (PUF),
preventing the AES key from being compromised under physical
attacks. The device owner or IP developer is meant to securely
embed the necessary keys offline prior to deployment. Depending
on whether the developer desires encryption and/or authentication,
she can encrypt the bitstream with the AES key and/or sign it with
the ECDSA/RSA private key. The bitstream can then be securely
decrypted (using the AES key) and authenticated (using the public
key hash) by the SPB. Finally, the SPB actively monitors for any
tampering.
2.3 Remote FPGAs-as-a-Service
FPGAs are becoming an increasingly important component for major cloud service providers (CSPs) [2, 8, 11, 13]. The most prevalent
example is AWS EC2 F1 instances, which provide 1, 2, or 8 exclusive
Xilinx Virtex UltraScale+ VU9P FPGAs, each with 64GB of local
DDR4 memory, tethered to a host CPU via a dedicated PCIe x16
link.
Figure 1: The AWS F1 development process and corresponding
ShEF threat model. The red arrows represent untrusted channels.
F1 instances are currently offered in a traditional Infrastructureas-a-Service (IaaS) fashion as shown in Figure 1. IP vendors use
the AWS FPGA Development Kit [3] to create a custom accelerator
using Xilinx’s development tools such as RTL, OpenCL, or C/C++
High-level Synthesis (HLS). Once the accelerator design is finalized,
the developers compile it into a bitstream binary. AWS leverages
partial reconfiguration, which allows disjoint spatial regions of the
FPGA fabric to be programmed via separate partial bitstreams. An
F1 instance is configured with two partial bitstreams: one belonging
to the CSP which contains the Shell logic, and one belonging to the
user’s accelerator design. The Shell is analogous to an operating
system as it provides the accelerator with virtualized peripherals
and debugging features (virtual JTAG/LEDs), while protecting the
physical FPGA from malicious logic [88]. The Shell is static logic
and continuously runs on the FPGA. At design time, developers
connect their accelerator module’s I/O ports to the standard Shell
interfaces. At deployment time, users leverage a command line
interface to dynamically program their chosen partial bitstream
onto the remaining reconfigurable region. Once an accelerator is
programmed, a runtime program on the host CPU initiates the
accelerator and facilitates execution by transferring data between
the CPU memory and FPGA device memory.
2.4 Challenges for Secure and Customized
Computing
ShEF aims to enable secure and customized computing on cloud FPGAs by providing key TEE building blocks. However, fundamental
assumptions made by FPGA manufacturers and inherent differences between FPGA and CPU cloud offerings induce important
challenges not addressed by prior work.
A lack of asymmetric keys. As described in Section 2.2, FPGA
manufacturers assume a threat model for a single, trusted user
whose AES key and public key hash are loaded onto the FPGA
in a secure facility. In contrast, cloud TEEs need to be utilized by
multiple, mutually distrusting parties who never have physical
access to the FPGA. Thus, an FPGA TEE must build a hardware
root-of-trust and remote attestation protocol on top of the available
AES key, as opposed to traditional private keys assumed by CPU and
prior accelerator TEEs [33, 51, 54, 78, 94, 105].
Figure 2: Architecture of the ShEF workflow with color-coded legend.
Presence of an untrusted Shell. Furthermore, many mechanisms
CPUs use to enable TEE building blocks do not apply to the spatial architecture of FPGAs. In CPUs, threads belonging to both
secure and insecure applications are time-sliced on the processor.
Thus, enclaves can directly access secure hardware using ISA extensions [33], bypassing the untrusted OS. For example, the SGX ISA
extensions allow users to directly access hardware mechanisms to
boot an enclave (ECREATE, EADD, EXTEND, and EINIT), generate
an attestation report and provision secrets (EREPORT), and provide isolated execution (EENTER and EEXIT, and SGX MEE [47]).
Similarly, Keystone [64] relies on a security monitor running in
the RISC-V machine mode with control over ISA-defined Physical
Memory Protection registers in order to enforce memory isolation.
In cloud FPGAs, however, the fabric is spatially shared with the
persistent and untrusted Shell logic. Any and all I/O ports are untrusted, as applications’ custom logic can only connect to a series
of I/O ports defined and exposed by the Shell.
Lack of secure and flexible I/O. Many FPGA-based accelerators
operate on data-intensive problems and stress off-chip I/O with
unique security requirements. For example, some accelerators (e.g.,
a Bitcoin miner) only require secure register-level access, while
other accelerators may exhibit more complex memory accesses
including streaming (e.g., for DNN weights) and random-accesses
(e.g., for graph processing). As we explore in Section 5, each accelerator requires distinct security and performance levels. Current
work on FPGA security [25, 35, 36, 52, 72, 99] does not address
the lack of secure I/O as a result of the Shell, nor do they provide
security mechanisms that can adapt to the distinct security and
performance levels required by diverse accelerators.
2.5 Threat Model
We assume the comprehensive threat model in Figure 1. The adversary attempts to compromise the confidentiality and integrity
of the code and data processed by the user’s accelerator running
on the FPGA. The adversary has full physical control of the FPGA
device post-manufacturing and is able to control privileged CPU software, such as the OS, VMM, and device drivers. Furthermore, the
adversary is able to control privileged FPGA logic, such as the AWS F1
Shell. We assume that any off-chip memory, including HBM, can be
compromised, as the adversary can either perform physical attacks
on off-chip buses, or intercept traffic via the Shell logic for HBM. We
assume that the physical package, supply chain, and manufacturer
of the FPGA are trusted. While we use a host program to transfer
data, we assume the host CPU is untrusted and do not depend on
any security mechanisms provided by the CPU TEEs. By removing
the host CPU from the TCB, we are not susceptible to the recent
attacks that plague CPU TEEs [28, 30, 58, 61, 65, 71, 80, 83, 91ś93].
Side-channel attacks are largely a function of applications’ specific logic. Thus, we do not claim defend against all possible sidechannel attacks. Instead, ShEF’s customizability allows us to provide established tools for developers to mitigate common FPGA
side-channel attacks such as controlled channel [100] and power
analysis [79, 102] attacks (see Section 5.2). We hope the open-source
community will leverage ShEF’s flexibility to contribute additional
security mechanisms.
We do not consider denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, as the CSP
has physical control of the hardware and can simply unpower it. The
CSP is incentivized to prevent DoS attacks due to the revenue loss
when the FPGA instance is unavailable. We do not consider attacks
against the CSP, as the Shell already protects against malicious
FPGA users. We do not consider covert channels; we assume the
tool flow used to generate the accelerator is trusted and run in a
secure environment.
3 SHEF WORKFLOW AND SECURITY MODEL
ShEF is an end-to-end framework that enables remote users to
design bespoke TEEs for accelerators in cloud FPGAs. ShEF is designed around existing mechanisms in cloud FPGAs (i.e., Xilinx
UltraScale+ and Intel Stratix 10) and does not require hardware
changes. That said, ShEF does necessitate the cooperation of both
FPGA manufacturers and CSPs to realize the TEE requirements
described in Section 2.1. This section provides an overview of ShEF
and its components, as well as the responsibility of all parties. Section 4 describes how these components enable the requisite TEE
building blocks.
The four key parties in the ShEF framework are shown in Figure 2. The Manufacturer is responsible for manufacturing the
physical FPGA chip. The Cloud Service Provider (CSP) owns the
physical datacenter that houses servers containing FPGAs and offers them to customers. ShEF splits the notion of a łcustomerž into
two separate entities. The IP Vendor creates the actual accelerator
design and distributes it to Data Owners (e.g., on a public marketplace [4]). The Data Owner then rents an FPGA instance from
the CSP, programs the accelerator, and uses it to process sensitive
data. The Data Owner should source accelerator designs only from
trusted IP Vendors. Of course, the IP Vendor and Data Owner can
be the same entity. The Data Owner does not have to trust the CSP,
but does assume trust in the Manufacturer and the IP Vendor.
We now review each party’s role and how trust is delegated by
following the steps in the ShEF framework in Figure 2.
Device Manufacturing (the Manufacturer). The security foundation of ShEF begins with the Manufacturer. The Manufacturer
must provision two keys for each FPGA device: an AES device
key and an asymmetric public/private device key pair (e.g., RSA
or ECDSA). The Manufacturer must burn the AES device key into
an e-fuse or BBRAM (and optionally encrypt it with a PUF) using
existing FPGA security mechanisms 1 during production. The
Manufacturer then embeds the asymmetric private device key into
the FPGA SPB firmware and then encrypts the firmware using
the AES device key 2 . The Manufacturer must also register and
publish the public device key via a trusted certificate authority.
Accelerator Development (the IP Vendor). The IP Vendor is
trusted to develop the accelerator IP in a secure environment such
as a secure workstation 3 . During the development process, the
IP Vendor connects the accelerator’s I/O ports to the open-source
ShEF Shield module instead of the Shell interface. The Shield provides configurable runtime secure I/O and isolated execution (see
Section 5). Since the Shield is parameterized RTL logic exposing the
same interface as the Shell, the IP Vendor can easily simulate and
integrate her design with the Shield. The IP Vendor can secure multiple accelerator modules with separate Shield modules, enabling
multiple isolated execution environments [57].
The IP Vendor then provisions a symmetric Bitstream Encryption
Key and an asymmetric Shield Encryption Key for the accelerator.
The Bitstream Encryption Key is used for bitstream confidentiality,
and the Shield Encryption Key is used to protect data transferred
between the Data Owner and the FPGA (both explained below). The
IP Vendor embeds the private Shield Encryption Key into each respective Shield module and compiles the entire design into a partial
bitstream. Finally, the IP Vendor encrypts the partial bitstream with
the Bitstream Encryption Key and distributes the encrypted partial
bitstream 4 . The IP Vendor creates one accelerator bitstream for
all users; the attestation process provisions unique keys to each
Data Owner.
Deployment (the Data Owner). Once the Data Owner is ready
to process sensitive data using the accelerator, she obtains a cloud
FPGA instance from the CSP 5 . The Data Owner then instructs
the CSP’s FPGA driver to program the accelerator onto the FPGA.
The FPGA driver first resets the FPGA, which initiates a secure
boot process 6 . The SPB begins by using BootROM code to load
the SPB firmware from disk, decrypting it using its embedded AES
device key. The SPB firmware boots the ShEF Security Kernel from
external storage onto a dedicated Security Kernel Processor executing from its own private, on-chip memory 7 . The Security Kernel
Processor can either be a reserved hardened CPU in the FPGA or
a static bitstream containing a soft CPU (e.g., MicroBlaze or Nios
II) [76]. The SPB firmware hashes the Security Kernel and uses its
hash and the private device key to generate a unique asymmetric
Attestation Key pair and a corresponding certificate. As a result,
the Attestation Key is cryptographically bound to the FPGA device
and the specific Security Kernel binary. The Security Kernel itself
contains no confidential information and has no direct access to
device keys, preventing attackers from leaking the device keys via
an illegitimate Security Kernel. The Security Kernel only has access
to the Attestation Keys that it receives from the SPB firmware via
a secure channel (e.g., on-chip shared memory).
The ShEF Security Kernel has three primary jobs. First, it performs remote attestation with the Data Owner and IP Vendor 8
(Section 4). Through this process, the Data Owner receives cryptographic proofs showing that the FPGA device, the Security Kernel,
and the accelerator partial bitstream are authentic, referencing the
Manufacturer and the IP Vendor as certificate authorities, respectively. Second, it mediates all access to the FPGA fabric. The CSP
uses the Security Kernel to first launch the Shell into its reserved
static logic region. The Security Kernel then securely receives the
accelerator’s Bitstream Encryption Key from the IP Vendor via a
secure channel established during attestation, and decrypts and
loads the accelerator onto the FPGA, connecting it to the Shell
interface via partial reconfiguration 9 . Since the Security Kernel
is open source and contains no secrets, the CSP can fully control
and audit the Shell loading process. Likewise, the Security Kernel
hash is included in the attestation report (Section 4); the IP Vendor
audits the hash before sending over the Bitstream Encryption Key.
Finally, the kernel continuously checks existing hardware monitors.
It can thus detect backdoor activity (e.g., JTAG and programming
ports) [24, 76], ensure that the authenticated accelerator bitstream
is not modified before use, and prevent any physical attacks. While
the Security Kernel relies on the host CPU to communicate with
the IP Vendor, this channel is authenticated and encrypted.
As part of the remote attestation process, the Data Owner generates a symmetric Data Encryption Key for each Shield module
(Section 4). Data Encryption Keys are used to encrypt the sensitive input data. The Data Owner receives the IP Vendor’s public
Shield Encryption Key 10 , and encrypts the Data Encryption Key(s)
against the IP Vendor’s public Shield Encryption Key to produce
Load Key(s). The Load Key(s) are subsequently used to securely
provision the Data Encryption Key into each ShEF Shield module.
Finally, the Data Owner is ready to utilize the accelerator, using
an (untrusted) ShEF host program on the untrusted host CPU to
proxy all communication to the accelerator 11 . The host program
forwards the Load Key and the encrypted data to the FPGA. The
ShEF Shield uses the private Shield Encryption Key to decrypt the
Load Key(s) and retrieve the Data Encryption Key(s), which in turn
secures the user data during runtime. When the outputs are ready,
the Shield transfers results, encrypted using the Data Encryption
Key, back to the Data Owner via the host program. As is the case
with the Security Kernel, all communication through the CPU is
encrypted and authenticated.
4 SECURELY ENABLING TEE BUILDING
BLOCKS
We now present a security argument to demonstrate how ShEF
enables all of the TEE building blocks (Section 2.1).
Figure 3: Remote Attestation and Secure Storage and I/O Protocols.
Hardware Root-of-Trust. While current FPGAs do not provide hardware support for requisite private asymmetric keys, ShEF
is able to build a root-of-trust via two manufacturer-provisioned
keys. The AES device key is the true root-of-trust, protected by existing mission-critical security mechanisms in current FPGAs. The
private device key provides the asymmetric cryptography needed
for attestation. Although it is embedded in firmware, it is encrypted
with the AES device key and thus imbued with the same level of
trust.
Secure Boot. ShEF’s secure boot process is built as an extension
to current FPGA boot mechanisms, which first executes BootROM
code on the SPB. The BootROM decrypts the SPB firmware using
the AES device key and hands off the boot process to it. We trust
that this step is secure as it is deployed in numerous mission-critical
FPGA applications.
Once the SPB firmware is initialized, its main job is to bootstrap
trust to the Security Kernel running on a dedicated processor. To do
so, it reads the Security Kernel out of the boot medium and hashes
it to obtain 𝐻 (SecKrnl). The SPB firmware signs the hash with the
private device Key DeviceKeypriv. It uses the resulting value to
seed a key generator to produce a unique asymmetric Attestation
Key pair AttestKeypriv,pub, which is cryptographically bound to
the device and the Security Kernel binary. It also generates a certificate over the Security Kernel and the resultant Attestation Key by
computing 𝜎SecKrnl = SignDeviceKey(𝐻 (SecKrnl), AttestKeypub).
The SPB firmware then loads the Security Kernel onto the processor and places the Attestation Key pair and 𝜎SecKrnl into the
Security Kernel’s private memory. Secure boot occurs before any
other software is loaded, ensuring that no untrusted software can
tamper with or monitor the Security Kernel. If the Security Kernel
Processor is a soft CPU, its partial bitstream is hashed alongside the
Security Kernel and the bitstream is loaded by the SPB firmware.
Remote Attestation. Once the Security Kernel boots, it waits
for a remote attestation request. Remote attestation executes via
a series of message exchanges between the Data Owner, the IP
Vendor, and the Security Kernel, shown in Figure 3. Through remote attestation, (a) the Data Owner generates an ephemeral Data
Encryption Key used to secure sensitive data, (b) the IP Vendor
validates the authenticity of the FPGA device and bitstream, and
(c) the Security Kernel receives the Bitstream Key required to load
the accelerator. Data Owners are in full control of which IP Vendor
to use for remote attestation for each FPGA instance.
The Data Owner initializes a standard TLS/SSL connection to
a trusted IP Vendor server 1 . The IP Vendor first generates a
random nonce 𝑛, as well as an asymmetric Verification Key pair
VerifKeypriv,pub. The IP Vendor sends 𝑛 and VerifKeypub to the
Security Kernel 2 .
Meanwhile 3 , the Security Kernel reads and hashes
the appropriate encrypted accelerator bitstream, obtaining 𝐻 (EncBitstrKey(Accelerator)). Using VerifKeypub and
AttestKeypriv, the Security Kernel performs key exchange to
generate a shared symmetric SessionKey with the IP Vendor,
allowing the Security Kernel and the IP Vendor to send encrypted
messages. To prevent any man-in-the-middle attacks, the Security
Kernel also signs SessionKey with AttestKeypriv to obtain a
new certificate 𝜎SessionKey. The Security Kernel then generates an
attestation report 𝛼, containing 𝑛, 𝐻 (EncBitstrKey(Accelerator)),
AttestKeypub, 𝐻 (SecKrnl), and 𝜎SecKrnl. The Security Kernel
signs this report using AttestKeypriv to obtain 𝜎𝛼, and finally
sends back 𝛼, 𝜎𝛼, and 𝜎SessionKey to the IP Vendor 4 .
The IP Vendor authenticates the attestation report starting with
the DeviceKeypub received through the Manufacturer’s certificate
authority 5 . The IP Vendor checks that 𝜎SecKrnl was signed by
the corresponding DeviceKeypriv, proving that a legitimate FPGA
generated the attestation report. To ensure that the Security Kernel
(and Security Kernel Processor, if applicable) is valid, the IP Vendor
consults a public list of ShEF Security Kernel (and Security Kernel
Processor) hashes. Next, the IP Vendor authenticates the attestation report by using AttestKeypub to ensure that 𝛼 was signed
with AttestKeypriv. The IP Vendor matches the signed nonce with
𝑛, preventing replay attacks, and the signed bitstream hash with
𝐻 (EncBitstrKey(Accelerator)), confirming that the correct bitstream was loaded into the Security Kernel’s memory. Finally, the
IP Vendor establishes a secure channel to the Security Kernel by
first generating the same SessionKey as the Security Kernel using
AttestKeypub and VerifKeypriv, and verifying that 𝜎SessionKey
was signed by AttestKeypriv.
Using the SessionKey, the IP Vendor securely transmits the
BitstrKey to the Security Kernel 6 . The Security Kernel decrypts
the accelerator bitstream and loads it onto the FPGA, ensuring that
the plaintext bitstream containing sensitive IP and Shield Keys are
only handled in secure on-chip memory.
Secure Storage and I/O. ShEF provides secure storage and I/O
to the Data Owner by creating a security perimeter via the ShEF
Shield that encrypts and authenticates all data external to it. Recall
that the IP Vendor provisioned a private Shield Encryption Key
into each Shield module in the accelerator. As part of the remote
attestation session, the IP Vendor provides the public Shield Encryption Key to the Data Owner (e.g., via a certificate authority)
7 . The Data Owner generates at least one Data Encryption Key
(e.g., one per Shield module) and encrypts them against the public
Shield Encryption Key to get the Load Key(s) 8 . The Data Owner
then encrypts sensitive input data in a secure location using the
appropriate Data Encryption Key. The Load Key(s) are later sent
to the FPGA Shield, which decrypts it to get the Data Encryption
Figure 4: ShEF Shield architecture. Dashed and solid lines correspond to unencrypted and encrypted data, respectively.
Key(s). The Shield uses it to ensure that all sensitive data are secured
during both storage and I/O as we discuss in Section 5.
Isolated Execution. The Shield and Security Kernel ensure isolated execution. The Security Kernel constantly runs and monitors
the FPGA programming and debug ports to prevent tampering with
accelerator logic during execution.
5 SHEF SHIELD: SUPPORT FOR FLEXIBLE
SECURITY
The Shield is a highly-configurable RTL module that provides isolated execution and secure I/O and storage by interposing on ports
between the accelerator and Shell. The Shield also realizes the necessary customization for FPGA TEEs. IP Vendors configure the Shield
to fit their accelerators’ memory access patterns and performance
and security requirements.
5.1 Shield Overview
Figure 4 shows how the Shield fits within a typical cloud FPGA
deployment consisting of a host CPU and an FPGA accelerator.
The host program coordinates execution via standard device drivers. It first loads the Load Key onto the FPGA, which the Shield
decrypts into the Data Encryption Key and stores in ephemeral
key storage. The host program then proxies encrypted commands
and data between the Data Owner and Shield via the CSP’s Shell
interfaces. The host program is untrusted and does not observe any
unencrypted data.
The CSP’s Shell logic provides two primary interfaces to the
host program and the accelerator. An AXI4-Lite interface, mastered
by the Shell, exposes memory-mapped registers for commands
and small amounts of data to the host. The accelerator and host
drive an AXI4 and DMA interface, respectively, to access FPGA
device memory through the Shell. While we focus on securing
device memory, Shells commonly provide a generic AXI4 interface
for both memory and PCIe [3]. Thus, the Shield can also support
additional interfaces such as PCIe via the same AXI4 interface.
The Shield provides a wrapper module that transparently secures
these interfaces. The host program accesses registers via AXI4-Lite
as before, and the accelerator accesses device memory via the same
AXI4 protocol. The Shield transparently decrypts and encrypts I/O
between the host program, the accelerator, and the device memory
as shown in Figure 4. Thus, IP Vendors can simply incorporate
and configure the Shield at design time in a plug-and-play manner.
Cryptographic modules that provide authenticated encryption are
at the core of the Shield. We use AES-CTR + HMAC modules as
default and present configurable alternatives in Section 6.2.4.
Register interface. The register interface provides authenticated encryption using the Data Owner’s Data Encryption Key.
The host program memory-maps accelerator-accessible registers
and reads/writes encrypted data and commands via pointers. For
writes from the host program, the Shield decrypts and authenticates the data before storing into the accelerator’s plaintext register.
Similarly, when the host program reads a mapped address, the corresponding plaintext register is encrypted and tagged before sent
to the Shell. The Shield provides a register file as shown in Figure 4;
users may optionally use their own register file with the Shield
simply decrypting/authenticating the AXI4-Lite interface. Furthermore, because AXI4-Lite register addresses may reveal sensitive
information, the Shield offers an additional option of encrypting
both addresses and data via a common address for all registers. In
this case, the Shield will decrypt and proxy the data to/from the
appropriate plaintext register.
5.2 A Flexible Memory Interface
5.2.1 Why Flexibility Is Necessary. As shown in Figure 4, the Shield
exposes the same set of AXI4 interfaces as the Shell. While the interface is generic, accelerators follow diverse paradigms when using
device memory. Some accelerators stream in large blocks of data
from memory, perform random accesses in on-chip buffers, and
stream out results to a separate memory region. For example, deep
neural networks (DNNs) stream in large blocks of weights. In applications like graph processing, accelerators use non-sequential
data-dependent memory accesses. Even a single accelerator can
exhibit distinct paradigms across memory regions, e.g., large streaming reads for weights and smaller reads/writes for activations in a
DNN.
The accelerator diversity, in terms of the number of reads/writes
to a memory region as well as the amount of data transferred in
each burst, have both performance and security implications for
the Shield. First, authenticated encryption, the Shield’s core security mechanism, needs to be performed over variable chunk sizes.
Smaller chunks require more read requests with higher compute
and storage overheads for integrity tags, while overly large chunks
transfer unnecessary data bytes. It is important to correctly size
the chunk granularity for each accelerator’s memory regions.
Second, accelerators that read and write the same chunk of memory yield an additional vulnerability. Computing a MAC over the
chunk and its address prevents spoofing attacks that directly modify
memory contents and splicing attacks that copy contents of memory
from one address to another [37]. However, it does not preclude
replay attacks where old values are returned for a read, since the
corresponding MAC tag is valid. To safeguard against replay attacks,
secure processors resort to Merkle Tree verification schemes [85],
in which MACs are organized in a tree. Since SRAM is precious in
CPUs, only the root node is always kept on-chip, while nodes to a
leaf are validated when accessing its corresponding address.
5.2.2 Designing for Flexibility. The Shield’s memory interface is
designed to allow IP Vendors to configure its features and performance, enabling bespoke TEEs customized to each accelerator. The
memory interface consists of one or more engine sets. Each burst
request is transformed by a burst decoder in the Shield, which consults a map of IP Vendor-specified memory regions and maps each
address range to one of the engine sets. Each engine set includes
encryption and authentication engines alongside on-chip buffers
and counters.
The engine set for each memory region can be configured separately by the IP Vendor to optimize for the different needs and
threat models of the target application. We review the configuration
options in the current Shield implementation:
Cryptographic engines. Each engine set contains configurable
encryption (AES) and authentication (HMAC/PMAC) engines. The
AES engine contains an internal 256-byte lookup table for the S-box.
At design time, the S-box can be duplicated up to 16 times per engine,
reducing the AES latency through parallel lookups at the cost of
higher resource consumption. Users are also able to configure the
AES key size (128 or 256 bits) during bitstream compilation. Since
the engines expose a simple valid/ready interface, IP Vendors can
simply substitute a new cryptographic engine in their place. We
demonstrate this flexibility in Section 6.2.4 by substituting a PMAC
engine in the place of HMAC to enable parallel MAC calculations.
Thus, IP vendors can instantiate multiple instances of each engine
to increase parallelism, or even use their own designs.
Chunk size. The IP Vendor denotes a chunk size 𝐶mem for each
memory region, which specifies the granularity of each authenticated encryption chunk. Each chunk is associated with a 12-byte
initialization vector (IV), which is incremented by 1 for each successive chunk to ensure that no two ciphertext blocks reuse the
same IV. Each chunk is authenticated via a 16-byte MAC tag in
encrypt-then-MAC mode stored in DRAM. By using large 𝐶mem
values for streaming patterns, IP Vendors can better amortize the
MAC tag overheads. 𝐶mem can be any size, from a byte up to the
entire FPGA memory.
On-chip buffers. Each engine set optionally includes a buffer,
implemented using Block RAM or UltraRAM, that reduces the overheads for random accesses within small memory regions. It stores
decrypted and authenticated plaintext data and their address ranges,
and can be thought as a cache with a line size of 𝐶mem. If a burst
request hits in the buffer, the engine handles all transfers without
accessing DRAM. For misses, the engine set simply generates burst
requests to read the entire 𝐶mem-byte chunk and 16-byte MAC
tag from DRAM. The engine set decrypts and authenticates the
returned ciphertext in parallel and fill in the buffer line. If the buffer
needs to evict a modified line, the engine set encrypts the line and
calculates a MAC tag over the ciphertext, and then performs the
necessary writes to DRAM. For writes, the engine set can first fill
the buffer line in the same manner as reads. Alternatively, if the
corresponding chunk is only written to once and not read (e.g.,
streaming writes), the IP Vendor can simply zero-out the on-chip
buffer, avoiding unnecessary reads.
Advanced integrity verification. If an accelerator reads and
writes the same chunk multiple times, additional mechanisms are
required to prevent replay attacks. The Shield supports optimized
Bonsai Merkle Trees [77] that create Merkle Trees over counters as
opposed to data chunks.
Merkle Trees are expensive for FPGA designs that need to access
every tree node from DRAM, unlike CPUs that can benefit from multiple tiers of caches. We make the observations that Merkle Trees
are used in CPU TEEs because (a) on-chip storage is scarce in CPUs,
and (b) secure processors must secure relatively small cachelinesized chunks (64B) over multiple gigabytes of memory. Accelerators,
however, do not face the same issues, as (a) contemporary FPGAs
provide much more on-chip memory via new technologies such as
UltraRAM [19], and (b) accelerators generally operate on smaller
address regions and can leverage large 𝐶mem chunks. Thus, ShEF
offers a simpler and more efficient alternative by leveraging the excess of on-chip RAM of FPGAs to store counters only over required
address regions (i.e., those that read and write chunks multiple
times).
Specifically, an on-chip counter module is configured for these
address regions, in addition to the above encrypted authentication
mechanisms. The engine set increments the on-chip counter value
ctr𝑖 by 1 for each write of chunk 𝑖 to DRAM. On every read to chunk
𝑖 from DRAM, a tag MAC(𝑖, ciphertext𝑖, ctr𝑖) is generated and verified against the off-chip tag. In this case, only one extra DRAM
access is needed, eliminating excessive off-chip accesses associated
with Merkle Trees. Since the IP Vendor can tailor 𝐶mem, the counter
size, and the memory region size to each specific workload, the
excess storage overheads are minimized.
Side Channels. The flexibility of the Shield can also help mitigate a number of side-channel attacks discussed in Section 2.4. For
controlled-channel attacks, IP vendors can significantly reduce the
number of data-dependent memory accesses by increasing 𝐶mem
as an effective countermeasure [44, 100], increasing security by
trading off bandwidth and storage efficiency. ShEF also provides
two effective countermeasures against remote power analysis. First,
ShEF hides the accelerator’s microarchitecture via bitstream encryption, of which current power analysis attacks require significant
knowledge [79, 102]. Second, ShEF provides a script to generate an
active fence of logic that hides sensitive power signals [62].
However, certain classes of side-channel attacks, such as timing
side-channel attacks, are application-dependent and require application knowledge to mitigate [90]. While we ensure that the timing of
Shield cryptographic engines does not depend on any confidential
information, we rely on IP Vendors to integrate application-specific
techniques if timing noninterference is desired. We discussed how
the register interface can be secured against address metadata attacks in Section 5.1. Further security mechanisms against address
metadata attacks, such as ORAM [84], can simply be added by
adopting open-source modules (e.g., [43]) on top of Shield engines
due to their generic interface.
6 IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
We implemented and evaluated ShEF on Xilinx UltraScale+ FPGAs.
Since ShEF only relies on the AES key storage and an SPB, it can also
be implemented on Intel FPGAs. Since we are not allowed to deploy
our secure boot process on AWS, we first implemented our endto-end workflow on a local UltraScale+ Ultra96 FPGA board [18].
We then deployed various Shield configurations with accelerators
on AWS F1 instances in order to evaluate performance, assuming
correct boot and attestation.
In both cases, we implemented the Shield as portable RTL code
in Vivado 2019.2. The Shield interfaces with the host program via
a ShEF runtime library, which links against the Xilinx runtime
(XRT) that provides FPGA drivers and libraries. Thus, as described
in Section 6.2.4, ShEF supports accelerators developed using RTL
and frameworks such as OpenCL and SDAccel. XRT and the host
program are not in the TCB.
6.1 End-to-End Ultra96 Implementation
As mentioned in Section 3, the root-of-trust is a set of two keys,
one AES key embedded in the secure storage and an asymmetric
key in the encrypted firmware. We provisioned an AES key into
the Ultra96 e-fuses. The Ultra96 boot process first executes out
of BootROM on the SPB with exclusive access to cryptographic
hardware and programming ports. We embedded the private device
key into the firmware and encrypted it with the AES device key. The
firmware is decrypted and loaded onto another hardened processor
called the platform management unit. We boot the Security Kernel
on a dedicated Cortex-R5 core running solely from dedicated onchip memory. The Security Kernel communicates with the SPB
via a dedicated IPI interface to access cryptographic hardware to
generate attestation reports, and runs on the R5 core continuously,
monitoring programming and debug ports.
We implemented the full end-to-end ShEF workflow, using a
Bitcoin accelerator (Section 6.2.4), on the Ultra96 board. We measured that the boot process, from power-on to bitstream loading, completes in 5.1 seconds. This is relatively small compared
to the commonly-observed 40+ second boot time of CSP VM instances [22, 23], plus the approximate 6.2 seconds of bitstream
loading time we observe on F1.
6.2 Shield Evaluation on AWS F1
We use AWS F1 instances to evaluate the area and performance
overheads of trusted execution with the ShEF Shield. The ShEF
Shield introduces encryption and integrity checks to all off-chip
memory accesses. This can create bandwidth bottlenecks if the
encryption/authentication rate is lower than the effective data rate
of off-chip memory. This can be addressed by properly configuring the Shield in three ways: a) partitioning the address space (if
possible) to use multiple engine sets, b) using multiple AES and
PMAC engines within an engine set, or c) increasing AES engine
S-box parallelism. This tradeoff between performance and Shield
resource overheads must be carefully managed by the accelerator
Table 1: Shield component utilization on AWS F1. The three base
modules on top do not include crypto and on-chip memory (OCM).
Component BRAM LUT REG
Controller 0 (0%) 2348 (0.26%) 547 (0.03%)
Engine Set 2 (0.12%) 1068 (0.12%) 2508 (0.14%)
Reg. Interface 0 (0%) 3251 (0.36%) 1902 (0.11%)
AES-4x 0 (0%) 2435 (0.27%) 2347 (0.13%)
AES-16x 0 (0%) 2898 (0.32%) 2347 (0.13%)
HMAC 0 (0%) 3926 (0.44%) 2636 (0.15%)
PMAC 0 (0%) 2545 (0.28%) 2570 (0.14%)
OCM Variable 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
Figure 5: Vector add throughput overhead for Shield configurations.
developer, leveraging the customizable design of ShEF, in order to
achieve the desired security and performance at the lowest cost.
6.2.1 FPGA Resources Overheads. Table 1 shows the FPGA resources (BRAM, LUTs, and registers) used by the Shield components.
An accelerator’s Shield contains one Controller, a configurable number of Engine Sets, and one Register Interface, whose base resource
requirements are shown in the top of Table 1. The bottom section shows the requirements of various cryptographic engines and
on-chip buffers as discussed in Section 5, which are used to augment the Register Interface and Engine Sets. For encryption, we
present two types of AES engines with 4x or 16x parallelism in
the S-box (Section 5). For authentication, we provide a SHA-256
HMAC engine, as well as a PMAC engine based on AES. Finally, the
configurable buffers and counters use a portion of on-chip memory
(max available 382Mb). A full Shield configuration’s requirement
is a sum of all components and their cryptographic engines and
buffers which combined commonly uses single-digit percents of
memory, LUTs, and registers, establishing that ShEF is cost effective
to use with cloud FPGAs.
6.2.2 Throughput Microbenchmarks. To illustrate the Shield’s parallelism, we use a vector-vector add microbenchmark that streams
in two vectors and outputs their sum. The input and output vectors are partitioned and secured with four engine sets each; each
set contains one AES-128 and HMAC engine and uses a 512-byte
chunk. The actual logic is minimal and the workload is strictly
bound by off-chip memory accesses. Figure 5 shows the relative
slowdown as a function of the vector size for two Shield configurations. Slowdown is relative to the execution time without the Shield
(insecure version). For short vectors, execution time is dominated
by initialization overheads, e.g., data movement and signalling between the FPGA and CPU. For long vectors, the overhead directly
relates to the encryption throughput available. By increasing the
Table 2: Performance overhead across Shield designs for SDP.
AES S-box parallelism, the slowdown drops below 50% for all vector
sizes. We analyzed similarly a matrix multiply microbenchmark,
which yielded similar, but less pronounced, insights (maximum
overhead of 1.26x for AES/4x) as matrix multiplication involves
more computation per data accessed.
6.2.3 End-to-End Design Example. We now demonstrate how ShEF
can easily enable security for a real-world, end-to-end use case.
SDP [53] recently proposes a GDPR-complaint storage solution
by coupling distributed smart Storage Nodes (SNs), to provide
encryption-at-rest and line-rate throughput, with a centralized Controller Node (CN), to control access policies and bootstrap SNs. The
authors directly cite the need for an FPGA TEE at each SN. FPGAs
provide both the necessary programmability to adapt to evolving
access policies and line-rate throughput difficult to achieve with
just CPUs. Meanwhile, the TEEs protect users’ keys and data by a)
attesting that the SN is authentic before provisioning keys, and b)
encrypting and authenticating application and storage traffic.
SDP thus integrates FPGA TEEs as follows. On startup, a TEE
within each SN remotely attests to the CN. The CN securely provisions a database of user keys into the TEE. Applications access files
within SNs via TLS, providing a user-specific identity. Logic within
the FPGA TEE on each SN encrypts all traffic to the application
(via a TLS key) and storage device (via the user’s specific key) for
GDPR compliance.
Enabling SDP. ShEF directly enables SDP via the workflow
presented in Section 3. The GDPR-compliant company assumes the
IP Vendor role and creates a bitstream combining a key-value store
IP, mapping user identities to files, with the Shield. SNs securely
boot the bitstream and remotely attest their identity to the CN.
The CN encrypts all user keys with the Data Encryption Key and
securely provisions them into SN FPGA memory. Applications then
directly form a TLS connection with the Shield, providing a user
identity for each file access. The Shield automatically encrypts and
authenticates files between the application and underlying storage.
By ensuring that each SN is authenticated and securing line-rate
I/O traffic, ShEF allows the company to deploy high-throughput
SNs anywhere in the cloud.
Configuring Shield Performance. While the Shield provides
automatic encryption-at-rest, it must be properly configured to
meet throughput and security requirements. To demonstrate this,
we created an SDP accelerator that performs gets/puts using a keyvalue store engine on top of the Shield. The Shield encrypts and
authenticates file accesses via the user key (to storage) and the TLS
key (to the application). Depending on file characteristics, the IP
vendor can configure the Shield to authenticate files on a per-file
or per-block basis.
Figure 6: Execution time of workloads across Shield configurations.
Value in parentheses denotes the workload’s memory access characteristics (STR=streaming, RA=random accesses, REG=register).
PMAC is an additional optimization for DNNWeaver.
We implemented our SDP accelerator on AWS F1 instances and
compared Shield overheads to the unsecured key-value store. Table 2 shows normalized, steady-state throughput overheads across
Shield configurations for 1MB file accesses, using a 4KB authentication block size. We used two identical engine sets each with 16KB
buffer Ð one for the storage device and one for TLS. Instead of
using multiple engine sets, which required complex address space
partitioning due to variable-length accesses, we increased engine
parallelism within each engine set by simply setting a configuration
parameter in the Shield. We began with 4 AES/4x and 1 HMAC
engine, but observed high overheads due to the application’s high
memory intensity. We attempted to increase S-box parallelism to
16x, but observed limited improvement as HMAC was the bottleneck. We replaced the HMAC engine with PMAC engines and
continued to increase the number of AES/PMAC engines until performance saturated at 8x parallelism for each. Thus, the Shield’s
configurability allowed us to enable SDP with only 20% overhead
to line-rate, and with only 4.3%, 5.0%, and 2.5% of the BRAM, LUT,
and REG area, respectively.
6.2.4 Customized Engines for Various Workloads. To demonstrate
how the Shield creates a bespoke TEE across accelerators with
disparate memory access patterns and security requirements, we
use five realistic benchmarks: a convolutional layer from a neural
network with an input size of 27×27×96, a filter size of 5×5, and an
output size of 27×27×256 with 32-bit values from a Xilinx reference
implementation [6]; the digit recognition task from the Rosetta
suite using the MNIST dataset [104]; an affine transformation kernel over 512×512 input images from a Xilinx vision accelerator [1];
DNNWeaver using LeNet [81]; and a Bitcoin mining benchmark
with a hash difficulty of 24. To configure the Shield, we instantiated
multiple engine sets and engines, depending on the interfaces of
each application, and successively increased engine parallelism to
saturate memory or accelerator bandwidth. Figure 6 shows performance results for four AES engine configurations, with either 4x
or 16x S-box parallelism, and 128-bit or 256-bit keys.
Convolution achieves high parallelism by streaming in batches
of feature maps and filters, and streaming out each output feature
map. We configure the Shield to match the high parallelism by
using 8 engine sets for input images and weights and 4 engines
sets for output filters, each with one AES and HMAC engine. We
Table 3: Inclusive resource utilization on AWS F1 for the largest
use a buffer of 128KB in the read set and 64KB in the write set.
We configure 𝐶mem to be 512 bytes to maximize AXI burst lengths
for high throughput. In doing so, we observe small overheads of
1.20x-1.35x.
Digit Recognition also uses separate engine sets for streaming
inputs and outputs, but it does not batch. Hence, we use just 2
engine sets for inputs and 1 engine set for outputs with total 24KB
and 12KB buffer, respectively, each with one AES and HMAC engine.
By using a large𝐶mem of 512 bytes, we are able to achieve overheads
of 1.85-3.15x. We expect even lower overheads with batching by
amortizing input overheads.
Affine Transformation reads non-sequential data, but reads
each address once with no writes. Thus, as with Convolution and
Digit Recognition, we can save on-chip memory by disabling integrity counters. Since Affine Transformation accesses data at consistent chunks of 64B, we use 8 engine sets for inputs with a total
32KB buffer and 4 engine sets for outputs with a total 16KB buffer,
all with one AES and HMAC engine. We observe overheads of
1.41x-2.22x.
DNNWeaver performs both streaming reads for weights and
arbitrary accesses for feature maps. Weights are only read in large
chunks, while feature maps require multiple reads and writes for
small chunks. Since DNNWeaver’s address space is difficult to partition, we provision two separate engine sets, but increase each set’s
engine parallelism. The weights engine set uses a large 𝐶mem of
4KB, and 4 AES and 1 HMAC engine with total 128KB buffer and
no integrity counters. The feature map engine set uses a smaller
𝐶mem value of 64B, and similarly 4 AES and 1 HMAC engine with
total 64KB of buffer. As the feature maps cover approximately 1MB
of memory, 16KB of on-chip storage is used for integrity counters.
In doing so, we achieve overheads of 3.20x-3.83x. These overheads
are primarily due to DNNWeaver waiting for long HMAC computations for large 4KB chunks for weights before issuing more bursts.
While the feature map engines also perform integrity checks, we efficiently cache these accesses by configuring a comparatively large
buffer. To alleviate the bottleneck, we replace the HMAC module
with 4 PMAC engines in the weight engine set, enabling higher authentication bandwidth for each memory transaction. This reduces
the DNNWeaver overhead to 2.31x for the AES-128/16x case, down
from 3.20x.
Bitcoin operates on small data (a 76 byte block header) and only
outputs a 4 byte nonce. We optimize for area by simply leveraging
the register interface, with one AES and one HMAC engine, to
secure communication. Because Bitcoin performs significant computation for each input, we observe almost no overheads required
to secure the accelerator.
Table 3 shows the percent resource utilization of the largest
(e.g., AES/16x) Shield configuration across each accelerator. By
matching the Shield configuration to the patterns and throughput
of each accelerator, we provided a TEE with strong security at low
performance and area overheads.
7 RELATED WORK
CPU Enclaves. Numerous flavors of secure processors and CPU
enclaves exist [17, 29, 33, 34, 41, 42, 67, 74, 75, 85ś87], with the
best known being Intel SGX and ARM TrustZone. Keystone [64]
is a recent framework for RISC-V enclaves that addresses CPUspecific memory-management challenges, such as self-paging and
dynamic resizing, but does not provide hardware-enabled authenticated encryption. Keystone and other CPU-based enclaves rely on
ISA extensions and hardware mechanisms not present in FPGAs,
such as RISC-V PMP and SGX instructions. ShEF addresses orthogonal problems. Namely, ShEF is an end-to-end framework securing
arbitrary custom logic in the face of challenges unique to cloud
FPGAs. The flexibility of ShEF allows users to quickly leverage
advances in secure processing, accelerate applications besides CPU
enclaves, and quickly address the numerous vulnerabilities arising
in secure processors [30, 61, 91].
Accelerator Enclaves. Graviton [94] modified the GPU peripheral hardware to protect against malicious device drivers from
directly accessing sensitive resources, but treats DRAM as trusted
memory. HIX [54] separated the driver out from the OS and ran
it inside a trusted CPU enclave, essentially creating a heterogeneous trusted environment across both CPU and GPU, but requiring
changes to the CPU and PCIe root complex. HETEE [105] proposed
fabricating a tamper-resistant box of accelerators (namely GPUs)
that a rack of servers can access via a centralized security controller
in a dedicated FPGA. However, it did not consider the unique challenges that arise in cloud FPGAs (Section 2.4) and required a specialized tamper-resistant chassis. Telekine [51] addressed a novel
side-channel in GPU enclaves in the context of ML training. In comparison, ShEF assumes a stronger threat model by neither trusting
off-chip memory (including HBM) nor relying on a CPU enclave.
ShEF requires no additional hardware or FPGA modifications. Border Control [73] sandboxed untrusted accelerators given access
to system memory assuming a trusted CPU using similar techniques to ShEF, such as caching and auditing memory accesses.
ShEF addresses the opposite problem of protecting accelerators
from insecure system software and the Shell.
FPGA Security. FPGAs have been used to accelerate cryptographic primitives [38, 70]. There is also increasing interest in general secure computing on FPGAs. PFC [99] used proxy re-encryption
to provide encrypted I/O to an accelerator, pre-programmed by
the manufacturer, on cloud FPGAs. Cipherbase [25] accelerated
encrypted database operations using an FPGA. Eguro and Venkatesan [36] used a trusted third party to sign and encrypt bitstreams to
be loaded on remote FPGAs. CPU enclaves have been simulated in
FPGAs [63, 64, 67]. Commercial FPGAs encrypt bitstreams via an
embedded key, preventing adversaries from snooping on or modifying the user design [96], but requiring a trusted third party. Coughlin et al. extended this process by using self-provisioning keys in the
FPGA hardware to eliminate the third party [35] and demonstrated
a remote attestation protocol. MeetGo [72] and AMBASSY [52]
discussed bootstrapping remote attestation to an embedded private
key and an ARM TrustZone processor, respectively. However, these
works did not address key challenges described in Section 2.4, such
as remote attestation within the cloud or the Shell, and required
users to implement isolated execution and secure storage and I/O.
Finally, Trimberger et al. [88] discussed security concerns of cloud
FPGAs, including how to detect malicious user logic and prevent
tampering with user logic. Mahmoud et al. [68] and Elnaggar et
al. [39] presented attack methods in multi-tenant FPGAs.
8 CONCLUSION
As compute shifts towards cloud accelerators, the need for both
secure and accelerated compute over sensitive data is dire. We
address this need with ShEF, a framework consisting of a secure
boot and configurable remote attestation process, as well as Shield
logic that guarantees run-time isolated execution. We leverage FPGAs’ reconfigurability to allow developers to craft a holistic and
bespoke trusted execution environment (TEE) to fit their security
and performance requirements. We prototyped ShEF on current
FPGA hardware. We demonstrated secure boot and remote attestation on a local FPGA, enabled a secure storage application, and
evaluated the Shield with several accelerators on AWS F1.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank our shepherd, Dmitry Ponomarev, and the
anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback. We are also grateful to Xilinx for a generous equipment donation. This work was
supported by the Stanford Platform Lab and its affiliates, as well as
by a Stanford Graduate Fellowship.
A ARTIFACT APPENDIX
A.1 Abstract
In our artifact, we provide the entirety of the ShEF source code,
including the Shield and implementations of the Secure Boot and
Remote Attestation protocols. Our artifacts also include a number
of reference benchmarks that we use to evaluate ShEF in Section 6.
We provide instructions on how to build, run, and evaluate Shield
benchmarks on AWS F1 instances. Our archival and GitHub repository also provides a README containing more details on using
ShEF.
A.2 Artifact Checklist (Meta-Information)
• Algorithm: ShEF framework, including Shield, Secure Boot, and
Remote Attestation protocols.
• Program: Includes custom vector-vector addition, matrix multiplication, SDP, and Bitcoin benchmarks. Also includes open-source
benchmarks from Xilinx [1, 6], Rosetta suite [104], and DNNWeaver
[81].
• Compilation: AWS F1 benchmarks compiled using AWS FPGA
Developer AMI Version 1.8.1, Xilinx Vivado/SDAccel Version 2019.2,
and Developer Kit Version 1.4.14. Development and compilation
runs on a z1d.2xlarge EC2 instance.
• Binary: Source code for Ultra96 Firmware and Shield included,
alongside scripts to generate FPGA bitstreams for AWS F1 instances.
• Run-time environment: AWS F1 bitstreams run on the AWS FPGA
Developer AMI Version 1.8.1 with Developer Kit Version 1.4.14, running on an AWS EC2 f1.2xlarge instance.
• Hardware: Shield evaluations performed on an AWS EC2 f1.2xlarge
instance.
• Execution: Shield evaluation performed using provided scripts.
• Metrics: Execution latency and resource utilization of various Shield
configurations compared to baseline accelerator.
• Output: Execution latency reported by runtime binaries. Resource
utilization reported by Xilinx Vivado compilation workflow.
• Experiments: Scripts and detailed workflow provided to compile
and generate benchmarks (Figure 6)
• How much disk space required (approximately)?: About 10 GB
for each compiled benchmark.
• How much time is needed to prepare the workflow (approximately)?: Around an hour to set up AWS F1 build environment.
• How much time is needed to complete experiments (approximately)?: Each benchmark bitstream compilation typically takes
around 3-4 hours. Compiling all configurations for an accelerator
can take a day, although different accelerators may be compiled in
parallel using multiple terminals/VMs.
• Publicly available?: Yes
• Code licenses (if publicly available)?: ShEF is held under MIT.
Portions (e.g., some source code and benchmark applications) may be
held under different licenses, including BSD-2 and Apache License
2.0.
• Archived (provide DOI)?: Yes, at 10.5281/zenodo.5735634 and on
GitHub at https://github.com/stanford-mast/ShEF.
A.3 Description
A.3.1 How to Access. The source code for the end-to-end ShEF
workflow, as well as benchmarks, is archived at 10.5281/zenodo.5735634.
A.3.2 Hardware Dependencies. This AE requires access to AWS
EC2 instances (z1d.2xlarge and f1.2xlarge).
A.3.3 Software Dependencies. Access to the AWS FPGA Developer AMI (https://aws.amazon.com/marketplace/pp/prodviewgimv3gqbpe57k?ref=cns_1clkPro) is required, which includes licenses for required Xilinx tools. Additionally, the AWS F1 Developer Kit is required and can be found on GitHub at https:
//github.com/aws/aws-fpga.
A.4 Installation
Obtain the code from the artifact repository or GitHub and follow
the instructions in the README under ShEF Shield Setup. Specifically, follow instructions to setup an AWS account and permissions,
the Developer instance using a z1d.2xlarge instance, and the Runtime instance using a f1.2xlarge instance.
A.5 Experiment Workflow
Specific benchmarks (namely DNNWeaver, bitcoin, and SDP) are
located in apps/<benchmark_name>. Building and running each
benchmark follows a similar workflow. We describe how to build
and run dnnweaver_shield, a DNNWeaver plus Shield benchmark
using LeNet, below.
First, build the bitstream using the Developer instance.
# Setup the env variable for the app
cd $SHEF_DIR / apps / dnnweaver_shield
export CL_DIR =$(pwd )
# Setup the build environment
source $AWS_FPGA_REPO_DIR / hdk_setup .sh
# Build the accelerator bitstream
cd $CL_DIR / build / scripts
./ aws_build_dcp_from_cl .sh -foreground
The build script will take several hours (typically 2-3). Be sure to
run in a tmux terminal or omit -foreground to use a nohup context
so that SSH session disconnects do not terminate your build. Once
the build is complete, submit your bitstream to AWS.
# Use the S3 bucket created during setup
aws s3 cp \
$CL_DIR / build / checkpoints \
/ to_aws /*. Developer_CL .tar \
s3 :// < bucket -name >/<dcp -folder -name >/
aws ec2 create -fpga - image \
-- region <region > \
--input - storage - location \
Bucket =<bucket -name >,\
Key=<dcp -folder -name >/<tar -name > \
--logs - storage - location \
Bucket =<bucket -name >,\
Key=<logs -folder -name >
Save the AFI and AGFI output by the command above. The AFI
build will take around one hour. Run the following command and
check that the status is available before proceeding.
aws ec2 describe -fpga - images \
--fpga -image -ids <your -afi -id >
Finally, SSH into Runtime instance. Load the FPGA with the AFI,
and build and run the test binary.
# Assuming same env variables as before
sudo su
source $AWS_FPGA_REPO_DIR / sdk_setup .sh
fpga -clear -local - image -S 0
fpga -load -local - image -S 0 -I \
<your -agfi -id > # AGFI , not AFI
fpga - describe -local - image -S 0 -R -H
cd $CL_DIR / software
make
./ test_lenet
The README also contains detailed instructions to build and
run experiments.
A.6 Evaluation and Expected Results
Each benchmark consists of two root application directories,
one representing the baseline and one with the Shield. For
example, for DNNWeaver, the projects are at apps/dnnweaver
and apps/dnnweaver_shield, respectively. Follow the instructions to build and run both as described above (the steps are
the same for both applications). Compare the end-to-end latencies reported by both runtime binaries. For example, we
observe a latency of 5073𝜇𝑠 for dnnweaver_shield compared
to 3054𝜇𝑠 with dnnweaver. The resource utilization for a bitstream can be found in $CL_DIR/build/reports/<timestamp>
.SH_CL_all_utilization.rpt, split up by module.
shield_wrapper_inst shows the overall Shield resource
utilization. Shield execution latency and resource requirements for
a given benchmark are reported in Figure 6 and Table 3.
A.7 Experiment Customization
For each application, the Shield can be customized by modifying parameters included in $SHEF_DIR/hdk/source/interfaces/
free_common_defines.vh. Please refer to the README for more
information.
A.8 Methodology
Submission, reviewing and badging methodology:
• https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-reviewbadging
• http://cTuning.org/ae/submission-20201122.html
• http://cTuning.org/ae/reviewing-20201122.html
REFERENCES
[1] [n. d.]. Affine Transformation. https://github.com/Xilinx/SDAccel_Examples/
tree/master/vision/affine.
[2] [n. d.]. Amazon EC2 F1 Instances. https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/
f1.
[3] [n. d.]. AWS EC2 FPGA Development Kit. https://github.com/aws/aws-fpga.
[4] [n. d.]. AWS Marketplace. https://aws.amazon.com/marketplace/search/results?
x=0&y=0&searchTerms=fpga.
[5] [n. d.]. Capital One Data Breach Compromises Data of Over 100 Million. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/29/business/capital-one-data-breachhacked.html.
[6] [n. d.]. CNN Convolution Example. https://github.com/Xilinx/SDAccel_
Examples/tree/master/getting_started/clk_freq/large_loop_ocl.
[7] [n. d.]. Deneb Genetics. http://www.denebgenetics.com/.
[8] [n. d.]. Deploy a model as a web service on an FPGA with Azure Machine
Learning service. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/machine-learning/
service/how-to-deploy-fpga-web-service.
[9] [n. d.]. Equifax Data Breach. https://epic.org/privacy/data-breach/equifax/.
[10] [n. d.]. F1 Acceleration for Montecarlo Financial Algorithms of FPGAs. https://www.xilinx.com/publications/events/developer-forum/2018-
frankfurt/f1-acceleration-for-montecarlo-financial-algorithms-on-fpga.pdf.
[11] [n. d.]. FPGA-accelerated Cloud Server. https://www.huaweicloud.com/enus/product/fcs.html.
[12] [n. d.]. FPGA-based AWS EC2 F1 instances for Cloud Network Security. https:
//valtix.com/blog/valtix_ec2_f1_sc19/.
[13] [n. d.]. FPGA Cloud Compute. https://cloud.baidu.com/product/fpga.html.
[14] [n. d.]. Huxelerate Standard Library. https://platform.huxelerate.it/docs/index.
html.
[15] [n. d.]. Illumina DRAGEN on AWS. https://aws.amazon.com/quickstart/
architecture/illumina-dragen/.
[16] [n. d.]. Intel Stratix 10 FPGA Applications. https://www.intel.com/content/
www/us/en/products/programmable/fpga/stratix-10/applications.html.
[17] [n. d.]. TrustZone. https://developer.arm.com/ip-products/security-ip/
trustzone.
[18] [n. d.]. Ultra96 Hardware User’s Guide. http://zedboard.org/sites/default/files/
documentations/Ultra96-HW-User-Guide-rev-1-0-V0_9_preliminary.pdf.
[19] [n. d.]. UltraScale+ FPGAs Product Tables and Product Selection
Guide. https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/selection-guides/
ultrascale-plus-fpga-product-selection-guide.pdf.
[20] [n. d.]. Xilinx Applications. https://www.xilinx.com/applications.html.
[21] [n. d.]. Xilinx Versal AI Core. https://www.xilinx.com/products/silicon-devices/
acap/versal-ai-core.html#applications.
[22] 2016. Comparing the Speed of VM Creating and SSH Access of Cloud Providers.
https://blog.cloud66.com/part-2-comparing-the-speed-of-vm-creation-andssh-access-on-aws-digitalocean-linode-vexxhost-google-cloud-rackspacepacket-cloud-a-and-microsoft-azure/.
1082ASPLOS ’22, February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland Mark Zhao, Mingyu Gao, and Christos Kozyrakis
[23] 2017. Understanding and Profiling GCE Cold Boot Time.
https://medium.com/google-cloud/understanding-and-profiling-gce-coldboot-time-32c209fe86ab.
[24] 2020. Intel Stratix 10 Device Security User Guide. Technical Report. Intel Corporation.
[25] Arvind Arasu, Spyros Blanas, Ken Eguro, Manas Joglekar, Raghav Kaushik,
Donald Kossmann, Ravi Ramamurthy, Prasang Upadhyaya, and Ramarathnam
Venkatesan. 2013. Secure Database-as-a-Service with Cipherbase. In Proceedings
of the 2013 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (New
York, New York, USA) (SIGMOD ’13). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1033ś1036. https://doi.org/10.1145/2463676.2467797
[26] Daniel J Bernstein and Tanja Lange. 2017. Post-quantum cryptography. Nature
549, 7671 (2017), 188ś194.
[27] Joppe W. Bos, Kristin Lauter, and Michael Naehrig. 2014. Private Predictive Analysis on Encrypted Medical Data. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2014/336.
https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/336.
[28] Claudio Canella, Daniel Genkin, Lukas Giner, Daniel Gruss, Moritz Lipp, Marina Minkin, Daniel Moghimi, Frank Piessens, Michael Schwarz, Berk Sunar,
Jo Van Bulck, and Yuval Yarom. 2019. Fallout: Leaking Data on Meltdownresistant CPUs. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS). ACM.
[29] D. Champagne and R. B. Lee. 2010. Scalable architectural support for trusted
software. In HPCA - 16 2010 The Sixteenth International Symposium on HighPerformance Computer Architecture. 1ś12. https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2010.
5416657
[30] Guoxing Chen, Sanchuan Chen, Yuan Xiao, Yinqian Zhang, Zhiqiang Lin, and
Ten H. Lai. 2018. SgxPectre Attacks: Leaking Enclave Secrets via Speculative
Execution. CoRR abs/1802.09085 (2018). arXiv:1802.09085 http://arxiv.org/abs/
1802.09085
[31] Jack Choquette and Wishwesh Gandhi. 2020. NVIDIA’s A100 GPU: Performance
and Innovation for GPU Computing. In 2020 IEEE Hot Chips 32 Symposium (HCS),
Virtual, August 16-18, 2020. IEEE.
[32] J. Cong, B. Liu, S. Neuendorffer, J. Noguera, K. Vissers, and Z. Zhang. 2011. HighLevel Synthesis for FPGAs: From Prototyping to Deployment. IEEE Transactions
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 30, 4 (2011), 473ś491.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2011.2110592
[33] Victor Costan and Srinivas Devadas. 2016. Intel SGX Explained. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Report 2016/086. https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/086.
[34] Victor Costan, Ilia Lebedev, and Srinivas Devadas. 2016. Sanctum: Minimal
Hardware Extensions for Strong Software Isolation. In 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 16). USENIX Association, Austin, TX, 857ś
874. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/
presentation/costan
[35] Aimee Coughlin, Greg Cusack, Jack Wampler, Eric Keller, and Eric Wustrow.
2019. Breaking the Trust Dependence on Third Party Processes for Reconfigurable Secure Hardware. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM/SIGDA International
Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (Seaside, CA, USA) (FPGA ’19).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 282ś291. https://doi.org/10.1145/3289602.3293895
[36] Ken Eguro and Ramarathnam Venkatesan. 2012. FPGAs for Trusted Cloud
Computing. In International Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (international conference on field-programmable logic and applications
ed.). IEEE. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/fpgas-fortrusted-cloud-computing/
[37] Reouven Elbaz, David Champagne, Catherine Gebotys, Ruby B. Lee, Nachiketh
Potlapally, and Lionel Torres. 2009. Hardware Mechanisms for Memory Authentication: A Survey of Existing Techniques and Engines. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 1ś22. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01004-0_1
[38] A. J. Elbirt and C. Paar. 2000. An FPGA Implementation and Performance
Evaluation of the Serpent Block Cipher. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM/SIGDA
Eighth International Symposium on Field Programmable Gate Arrays (Monterey,
California, USA) (FPGA ’00). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 33ś40. https://doi.org/
10.1145/329166.329176
[39] R. Elnaggar, R. Karri, and K. Chakrabarty. 2019. Multi-Tenant FPGA-based
Reconfigurable Systems: Attacks and Defenses. In 2019 Design, Automation Test
in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE). 7ś12. https://doi.org/10.23919/DATE.
2019.8714904
[40] Andre Esteva, Katherine Chou, Serena Yeung, Nikhil Naik, Ali Madani, Ali
Mottaghi, Yun Liu, Eric Topol, Jeff Dean, and Richard Socher. 2021. Deep
learning-enabled medical computer vision. NPJ digital medicine 4, 1 (2021), 1ś9.
[41] Dmitry Evtyushkin, Jesse Elwell, Meltem Ozsoy, Dmitry Ponomarev, Nael Abu
Ghazaleh, and Ryan Riley. 2014. Iso-X: A Flexible Architecture for HardwareManaged Isolated Execution. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (Cambridge, United Kingdom)
(MICRO-47). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 190ś202. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.2014.25
[42] Andrew Ferraiuolo, Mark Zhao, Andrew C. Myers, and G. Edward Suh. 2018. HyperFlow: A Processor Architecture for Nonmalleable, Timing-Safe Information
Flow Security. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security (Toronto, Canada) (CCS ’18). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 1583ś1600. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243743
[43] C. W. Fletcher, L. Ren, A. Kwon, M. v. Dijk, E. Stefanov, D. Serpanos, and S. Devadas. 2015. A Low-Latency, Low-Area Hardware Oblivious RAM Controller. In
2015 IEEE 23rd Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom
Computing Machines. 215ś222. https://doi.org/10.1109/FCCM.2015.58
[44] Yangchun Fu, Erick Bauman, Raul Quinonez, and Zhiqiang Lin. 2017. SGX-LAPD:
Thwarting Controlled Side Channel Attacks via Enclave Verifiable Page Faults.
In International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions, and Defenses.
Springer, 357ś380.
[45] Ilya Ganusov and Mahesh Iyer. 2020. Agilex Generation of Intel FPGAs. In 2020
IEEE Hot Chips 32 Symposium (HCS), Virtual, August 16-18, 2020. IEEE.
[46] Craig Gentry. 2009. A Fully Homomorphic Encryption Scheme. Ph. D. Dissertation.
Stanford, CA, USA. Advisor(s) Boneh, Dan. AAI3382729.
[47] Shay Gueron. 2016. A Memory Encryption Engine Suitable for General Purpose
Processors. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/204. https://eprint.iacr.org/
2016/204.
[48] S. Hadjis and K. Olukotun. 2019. TensorFlow to Cloud FPGAs: Tradeoffs for
Accelerating Deep Neural Networks. In 2019 29th International Conference on
Field Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL). 360ś366. https://doi.org/10.
1109/FPL.2019.00064
[49] John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. 2019. A New Golden Age for Computer
Architecture. Commun. ACM 62, 2 (Jan. 2019), 48ś60. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3282307
[50] M. Horowitz. 2014. 1.1 Computing’s energy problem (and what we can do about
it). In 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical
Papers (ISSCC). 10ś14. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSCC.2014.6757323
[51] Tyler Hunt, Zhipeng Jia, Vance Miller, Ariel Szekely, Yige Hu, Christopher J.
Rossbach, and Emmett Witchel. 2020. Telekine: Secure Computing with
Cloud GPUs. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 20). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 817ś833.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20/presentation/hunt
[52] Dongil Hwang, Sanzhar Yeleuov, Jiwon Seo, Minu Chung, Hyungon Moon, and
Yunheung Paek. 2021. Ambassy: A Runtime Framework to Delegate Trusted
Applications in an ARM/FPGA Hybrid System. IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing (2021), 1ś1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2021.3086143
[53] Zsolt István, Soujanya Ponnapalli, and Vijay Chidambaram. 2021. SoftwareDefined Data Protection: Low Overhead Policy Compliance at the Storage
Layer is within Reach! Proc. VLDB Endow. 14, 7 (March 2021), 1167ś1174.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3450980.3450986
[54] Insu Jang, Adrian Tang, Taehoon Kim, Simha Sethumadhavan, and Jaehyuk Huh.
2019. Heterogeneous Isolated Execution for Commodity GPUs. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Providence, RI, USA) (ASPLOS ’19).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 455ś468. https://doi.org/10.1145/3297858.3304021
[55] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa, S. Bates, S.
Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, R. Boyle, P. Cantin, C. Chao, C. Clark, J. Coriell, M.
Daley, M. Dau, J. Dean, B. Gelb, T. V. Ghaemmaghami, R. Gottipati, W. Gulland,
R. Hagmann, C. R. Ho, D. Hogberg, J. Hu, R. Hundt, D. Hurt, J. Ibarz, A. Jaffey,
A. Jaworski, A. Kaplan, H. Khaitan, D. Killebrew, A. Koch, N. Kumar, S. Lacy,
J. Laudon, J. Law, D. Le, C. Leary, Z. Liu, K. Lucke, A. Lundin, G. MacKean, A.
Maggiore, M. Mahony, K. Miller, R. Nagarajan, R. Narayanaswami, R. Ni, K. Nix,
T. Norrie, M. Omernick, N. Penukonda, A. Phelps, J. Ross, M. Ross, A. Salek, E.
Samadiani, C. Severn, G. Sizikov, M. Snelham, J. Souter, D. Steinberg, A. Swing,
M. Tan, G. Thorson, B. Tian, H. Toma, E. Tuttle, V. Vasudevan, R. Walter, W.
Wang, E. Wilcox, and D. H. Yoon. 2017. In-datacenter performance analysis of a
tensor processing unit. In 2017 ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 1ś12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3079856.3080246
[56] S. Karandikar, H. Mao, D. Kim, D. Biancolin, A. Amid, D. Lee, N. Pemberton,
E. Amaro, C. Schmidt, A. Chopra, Q. Huang, K. Kovacs, B. Nikolic, R. Katz,
J. Bachrach, and K. Asanovic. 2018. FireSim: FPGA-Accelerated Cycle-Exact
Scale-Out System Simulation in the Public Cloud. In 2018 ACM/IEEE 45th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 29ś42. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ISCA.2018.00014
[57] Ahmed Khawaja, Joshua Landgraf, Rohith Prakash, Michael Wei, Eric Schkufza,
and Christopher J. Rossbach. 2018. Sharing, Protection, and Compatibility
for Reconfigurable Fabric with Amorphos. In Proceedings of the 13th USENIX
Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (Carlsbad, CA, USA)
(OSDI’18). USENIX Association, USA, 107ś127.
[58] Paul Kocher, Jann Horn, Anders Fogh, , Daniel Genkin, Daniel Gruss, Werner
Haas, Mike Hamburg, Moritz Lipp, Stefan Mangard, Thomas Prescher, Michael
Schwarz, and Yuval Yarom. 2019. Spectre Attacks: Exploiting Speculative Execution. In 40th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P’19).
[59] David Koeplinger, Matthew Feldman, Raghu Prabhakar, Yaqi Zhang, Stefan Hadjis, Ruben Fiszel, Tian Zhao, Luigi Nardi, Ardavan Pedram, Christos Kozyrakis, and Kunle Olukotun. 2018. Spatial: A Language and Compiler for Application Accelerators. SIGPLAN Not. 53, 4 (June 2018), 296ś311.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3296979.3192379
1083ShEF : Shielded Enclaves for Cloud FPGAs ASPLOS ’22, February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland
[60] Dario Korolija, Timothy Roscoe, and Gustavo Alonso. 2020. Do OS abstractions
make sense on FPGAs?. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 991ś1010. https://www.
usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/roscoe
[61] Esmaeil Mohammadian Koruyeh, Khaled N. Khasawneh, Chengyu Song, and
Nael Abu-Ghazaleh. 2018. Spectre Returns! Speculation Attacks using the
Return Stack Buffer. In 12th USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT
18). USENIX Association, Baltimore, MD. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
woot18/presentation/koruyeh
[62] J. Krautter, D. R. E. Gnad, F. Schellenberg, A. Moradi, and M. B. Tahoori. 2019.
Active Fences against Voltage-based Side Channels in Multi-Tenant FPGAs. In
2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD).
1ś8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCAD45719.2019.8942094
[63] I. Lebedev, K. Hogan, and S. Devadas. 2018. Invited Paper: Secure Boot and Remote Attestation in the Sanctum Processor. In 2018 IEEE 31st Computer Security
Foundations Symposium (CSF). 46ś60. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSF.2018.00011
[64] Dayeol Lee, David Kohlbrenner, Shweta Shinde, Krste Asanović, and Dawn
Song. 2020. Keystone: An Open Framework for Architecting Trusted Execution
Environments. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth European Conference on Computer
Systems (Heraklion, Greece) (EuroSys ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 38, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3342195.
3387532
[65] Moritz Lipp, Michael Schwarz, Daniel Gruss, Thomas Prescher, Werner Haas,
Anders Fogh, Jann Horn, Stefan Mangard, Paul Kocher, Daniel Genkin, Yuval
Yarom, and Mike Hamburg. 2018. Meltdown: Reading Kernel Memory from
User Space. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18).
[66] Vincent Liu, Mark A. Musen, and Timothy Chou. 2015. Data Breaches
of Protected Health Information in the United States. JAMA 313,
14 (04 2015), 1471ś1473. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.2252
arXiv:https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/articlepdf/2247135/jld150008.pdf
[67] Martin Maas, Eric Love, Emil Stefanov, Mohit Tiwari, Elaine Shi, Krste Asanovic,
John Kubiatowicz, and Dawn Song. 2013. PHANTOM: Practical Oblivious
Computation in a Secure Processor. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer &#38; Communications Security (Berlin, Germany) (CCS
’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 311ś324. https://doi.org/10.1145/2508859.
2516692
[68] D. Mahmoud and M. Stojilović. 2019. Timing Violation Induced Faults in MultiTenant FPGAs. In 2019 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition
(DATE). 1745ś1750. https://doi.org/10.23919/DATE.2019.8715263
[69] Paolo Mantovani, Davide Giri, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Luca Piccolboni, Joseph
Zuckerman, Emilio G. Cota, Michele Petracca, Christian Pilato, and Luca P.
Carloni. 2020. Agile SoC Development with Open ESP. In 2020 IEEE/ACM
International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD 20).
[70] Scott McMillan and Cameron Patterson. 2001. JBitsTM Implementations of the
Advanced Encryption Standard (Rijndael). In Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL ’01). SpringerVerlag, London, UK, UK, 162ś171. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=647928.
739896
[71] Kit Murdock, David Oswald, Flavio D. Garcia, Jo Van Bulck, Daniel Gruss,
and Frank Piessens. 2020. Plundervolt: Software-based Fault Injection Attacks
against Intel SGX. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S&P’20).
[72] Hyunyoung Oh, Kevin Nam, Seongil Jeon, Yeongpil Cho, and Yunheung Paek.
2021. MeetGo: A Trusted Execution Environment for Remote Applications on
FPGA. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 51313ś51324. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2021.3069223
[73] Lena E. Olson, Jason Power, Mark D. Hill, and David A. Wood. 2015. Border Control: Sandboxing Accelerators. In Proceedings of the 48th International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (Waikiki, Hawaii) (MICRO-48). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 470ś481. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2830772.2830819
[74] Emmanuel Owusu, Jorge Guajardo, Jonathan McCune, Jim Newsome, Adrian
Perrig, and Amit Vasudevan. 2013. OASIS: On Achieving a Sanctuary for Integrity and Secrecy on Untrusted Platforms. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer &#38; Communications Security (Berlin, Germany) (CCS ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13ś24. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2508859.2516678
[75] J. Park, N. Kang, T. Kim, Y. Kwon, and J. Huh. 2020. Nested Enclave: Supporting
Fine-grained Hierarchical Isolation with SGX. In 2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 776ś789. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ISCA45697.2020.00069
[76] Ed Peterson. 2018. Developing Tamper-Resistant Designs with UltraScale and
UltraScale+ FPGAs. Technical Report. Xilinx, Inc.
[77] Brian Rogers, Siddhartha Chhabra, Milos Prvulovic, and Yan Solihin. 2007.
Using Address Independent Seed Encryption and Bonsai Merkle Trees to Make
Secure Processors OS- and Performance-Friendly. In Proceedings of the 40th
Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO 40).
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 183ś196. https://doi.org/10.
1109/MICRO.2007.44
[78] M. Sabt, M. Achemlal, and A. Bouabdallah. 2015. Trusted Execution Environment: What It is, and What It is Not. In 2015 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA,
Vol. 1. 57ś64. https://doi.org/10.1109/Trustcom.2015.357
[79] F. Schellenberg, D. R. E. Gnad, A. Moradi, and M. B. Tahoori. 2018. An inside
job: Remote power analysis attacks on FPGAs. In 2018 Design, Automation Test
in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE). 1111ś1116. https://doi.org/10.23919/
DATE.2018.8342177
[80] Michael Schwarz, Moritz Lipp, Daniel Moghimi, Jo Van Bulck, Julian Stecklina, Thomas Prescher, and Daniel Gruss. 2019. ZombieLoad: Cross-PrivilegeBoundary Data Sampling. In CCS.
[81] H. Sharma, J. Park, D. Mahajan, E. Amaro, J. K. Kim, C. Shao, A. Mishra, and
H. Esmaeilzadeh. 2016. From high-level deep neural models to FPGAs. In 2016
49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
1ś12. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.2016.7783720
[82] Ahmad Shawahna, Sadiq M. Sait, and Aiman El-Maleh. 2019. FPGA-Based
Accelerators of Deep Learning Networks for Learning and Classification: A
Review. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 7823ś7859. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.
2890150
[83] Dimitrios Skarlatos, Mengjia Yan, Bhargava Gopireddy, Read Sprabery, Josep Torrellas, and Christopher W. Fletcher. 2019. MicroScope: Enabling Microarchitectural Replay Attacks. In Proceedings of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture (Phoenix, Arizona) (ISCA ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 318ś331. https://doi.org/10.1145/3307650.3322228
[84] Emil Stefanov, Marten van Dijk, Elaine Shi, Christopher Fletcher, Ling Ren,
Xiangyao Yu, and Srinivas Devadas. 2013. Path ORAM: An Extremely Simple
Oblivious RAM Protocol. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security (Berlin, Germany) (CCS ’13). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 299ś310. https://doi.org/10.1145/2508859.2516660
[85] G. E. Suh, D. Clarke, B. Gasend, M. van Dijk, and S. Devadas. 2003. Efficient
memory integrity verification and encryption for secure processors. In Proceedings. 36th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2003.
MICRO-36. 339ś350. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.2003.1253207
[86] Richard Ta-Min, Lionel Litty, and David Lie. 2006. Splitting Interfaces: Making
Trust Between Applications and Operating Systems Configurable. In Proceedings
of the 7th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (Seattle,
Washington) (OSDI ’06). USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA, 279ś292.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1298455.1298482
[87] David Lie Chandramohan Thekkath, Mark Mitchell, Patrick Lincoln, Dan Boneh,
John Mitchell, and Mark Horowitz. 2000. Architectural Support for Copy and
Tamper Resistant Software. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) (ASPLOS IX). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
168ś177. https://doi.org/10.1145/378993.379237
[88] S. Trimberger and S. McNeil. 2017. Security of FPGAs in data centers. In
2017 IEEE 2nd International Verification and Security Workshop (IVSW). 117ś122.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IVSW.2017.8031556
[89] Yatish Turakhia, Gill Bejerano, and William J. Dally. 2018. Darwin: A Genomics
Co-Processor Provides up to 15,000X Acceleration on Long Read Assembly.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Williamsburg, VA,
USA) (ASPLOS ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
199ś213. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173162.3173193
[90] Klaus v. Gleissenthall, Rami Gökhan Kıcı, Deian Stefan, and Ranjit Jhala. 2019.
IODINE: Verifying Constant-Time Execution of Hardware. In 28th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA,
1411ś1428. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/
von-gleissenthall
[91] Jo Van Bulck, Marina Minkin, Ofir Weisse, Daniel Genkin, Baris Kasikci, Frank
Piessens, Mark Silberstein, Thomas F. Wenisch, Yuval Yarom, and Raoul Strackx.
2018. Foreshadow: Extracting the Keys to the Intel SGX Kingdom with Transient
Out-of-Order Execution. In Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium.
USENIX Association.
[92] Jo Van Bulck, Daniel Moghimi, Michael Schwarz, Moritz Lipp, Marina Minkin,
Daniel Genkin, Yarom Yuval, Berk Sunar, Daniel Gruss, and Frank Piessens.
2020. LVI: Hijacking Transient Execution through Microarchitectural Load
Value Injection. In 41th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P’20).
[93] Stephan van Schaik, Alyssa Milburn, Sebastian Österlund, Pietro Frigo, Giorgi
Maisuradze, Kaveh Razavi, Herbert Bos, and Cristiano Giuffrida. 2019. RIDL:
Rogue In-flight Data Load. In S&P.
[94] Stavros Volos, Kapil Vaswani, and Rodrigo Bruno. 2018. Graviton: Trusted
Execution Environments on GPUs. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18). USENIX Association, Carlsbad,
CA, 681ś696. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/volos
[95] Martin Voogel, Yohan Frans, and Matt Ouellette. 2020. Xilinx Versal Premium
Series. In 2020 IEEE Hot Chips 32 Symposium (HCS), Virtual, August 16-18, 2020.
IEEE.
1084ASPLOS ’22, February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland Mark Zhao, Mingyu Gao, and Christos Kozyrakis
[96] Kyle Wilkinson. 2018. XAPP 1267: Using Encryption and Authentication to Secure
an UltraScale/UltraScale+ FPGA Bitstream. Technical Report. Xilinx, Inc.
[97] P. F. Wolfe, R. Patel, R. Munafo, M. Varia, and M. Herbordt. 2020. Secret Sharing
MPC on FPGAs in the Datacenter. In 2020 30th International Conference on FieldProgrammable Logic and Applications (FPL). 236ś242. https://doi.org/10.1109/
FPL50879.2020.00047
[98] L. Wu, D. Bruns-Smith, F. A. Nothaft, Q. Huang, S. Karandikar, J. Le, A. Lin,
H. Mao, B. Sweeney, K. Asanović, D. A. Patterson, and A. D. Joseph. 2019.
FPGA Accelerated INDEL Realignment in the Cloud. In 2019 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). 277ś290. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2019.00044
[99] L. Xu, W. Shi, and T. Suh. 2014. PFC: Privacy Preserving FPGA Cloud - A
Case Study of MapReduce. In 2014 IEEE 7th International Conference on Cloud
Computing. 280ś287. https://doi.org/10.1109/CLOUD.2014.46
[100] Y. Xu, W. Cui, and M. Peinado. 2015. Controlled-Channel Attacks: Deterministic
Side Channels for Untrusted Operating Systems. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy. 640ś656. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2015.45
[101] Chengliang Zhang, Junzhe Xia, Baichen Yang, Huancheng Puyang, Wei Wang,
Ruichuan Chen, Istemi Ekin Akkus, Paarijaat Aditya, and Feng Yan. 2021. Citadel:
Protecting Data Privacy and Model Confidentiality for Collaborative Learning.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 546ś561. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3472883.3486998
[102] M. Zhao and G. E. Suh. 2018. FPGA-Based Remote Power Side-Channel Attacks.
In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 229ś244. https://doi.org/
10.1109/SP.2018.00049
[103] Shijun Zhao, Qianying Zhang, Guangyao Hu, Yu Qin, and Dengguo Feng. 2014.
Providing Root of Trust for ARM TrustZone Using On-Chip SRAM. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Trustworthy Embedded Devices
(Scottsdale, Arizona, USA) (TrustED ’14). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 25ś36. https://doi.org/10.1145/2666141.2666145
[104] Yuan Zhou, Udit Gupta, Steve Dai, Ritchie Zhao, Nitish Srivastava, Hanchen
Jin, Joseph Featherston, Yi-Hsiang Lai, Gai Liu, Gustavo Angarita Velasquez,
Wenping Wang, and Zhiru Zhang. 2018. Rosetta: A Realistic High-Level Synthesis Benchmark Suite for Software Programmable FPGAs. In Proceedings of the
2018 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(Monterey, CALIFORNIA, USA) (FPGA ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 269ś278.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3174243.3174255
[105] J. Zhu, R. Hou, X. Wang, W. Wang, J. Cao, B. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Ying,
L. Zhang, and D. Meng. 2020. Enabling Rack-scale Confidential Computing
using Heterogeneous Trusted Execution Environment. In 2020 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP). 1450ś1465. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40000.2020.
00054
1085